Recent years have seen the emergence of new critics of modern science who
have been described, and often describe themselves, as postmodernists,
multiculturalists, or cultural pluralists.1 Their attacks on modern science
emanate from a number of different academic disciplines, including ecol-
ogy, medicine, history, politics, sociology, and even literary criticism. These
critics reject the commonly held view that current science is a culture-neutral
enterprise of universal and cosmopolitan reach and the common heritage of
humanity, despite its historical genesis within the geographical confines of
Europe. Instead they maintain that the knowledge offered by modern sci-
ence cannot be treated as universal, but has to be seen as inescapably rooted
in the cultural singularities of the West. It leads them to demand greater
recognition for the large reservoirs of indigenous knowledge carried by non-
Western cultures and reject as hegemonic and imperialistic the exclusive
claims made for modern science.2 Their stance is vehemently rejected by
modernists, who view any accommodation with traditional knowledge as
embracing archaic, mythical, superstitious, and irrational systems of
thought that would return us to the medieval “Dark Ages” that preceded
Enlightenment science.3 The resultant ferocity and intensity of the debates
generated has led observers to describe them as the “science wars.”4
Yet there is a shared Eurocentric presumption that underlies, and
undermines, both sides in these debates—namely, that the historical roots
of modern science must lie exclusively in Europe simply because modern
science developed in Europe. This is wrong. The roots of modern science
are “dialogical”—that is, the result of a long-running dialogue between ideas
that came to Europe from a wide diversity of cultures through complex
historical and geographical routes.5 More particularly we will find that the
pivotal episode in the rise of modern science, the Copernican Revolution,
A. Bala, The Dialogue of Civilizations in the Birth of Modern Science
© Arun Bala 2006
was profoundly influenced by Arabic,6 Chinese, Indian, and ancient
Egyptian ideas and discoveries that came together in Europe over a few cen-
turies. Such multicultural contributions not only made possible the narrow
Copernican Revolution that led to acceptance of the heliocentric theory,
but also the wider Copernican Revolution that led, through Galileo and
Kepler, to Newton’s unification of cosmological and physical theory.
Today there is wide recognition of the global interactions that created our
contemporary social, political, and economic systems as Europe, through its
colonizing enterprise, drew on the resources and products of a wide diversity
of cultures to bind them as parts of a single world system.7 Modern science
should also be seen as a product of this same global interaction, as Europe
drew on the intellectual resources of the cultures it encountered by both
dominating and learning from them.8 The voyages of geographical discovery
that put Europeans in contact with many other cultures must also be seen as
voyages of intellectual discovery that allowed Europeans to acquire and
exploit the knowledge of these cultures. Modern science is the outcome of a
dialogue within the West that drew on ideas and discoveries from many
civilizations—something that neither modernist nor postmodernist con-
ceptions of the rise of the new science acknowledge adequately.9
It may be feared that the originality and creativity of the West in forging
modern science is diminished when it is traced to a dialogue with ideas
drawn from other civilizations. But modern science was not simply the
result of a passive accumulation of ideas and practices from non-Western
traditions of thought. Rather, it was the outcome of a process of integrating
seminal discoveries from many cultures and combining them within Europe
into a new synthesis not achieved elsewhere. The Copernican Revolution be-
came a turning point for precisely such a multicultural synthesis because its
key heliocentric idea—born in ancient Europe with Aristarchus and resur-
rected in modern Europe by Copernicus—could only be consolidated by
drawing on the philosophical, mathematical, scientific, and technological
discoveries of many civilizations.
This has important implications for how we view the so-called science
wars. We cannot go along with either modernists or postmodernists when
they separate the West from the Rest in their discussions of the birth of
modern science. We cannot agree with the way both treat modern science
as something historically and cognitively alien to the traditional sciences—
with zealously “antitraditional” modernists on one side, and radically “pro-
traditional” postmodernists on the other. Contrary to what both assume,
the science wars are not between traditions of science historically and intel-
lectually disconnected from one another. If modern science has emerged
through dialogue with non-Western traditions and has grown by drawing
upon their resources, then we have to recognize that the Rest have crucially
2 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
penetrated the West. The tradition of modern science, generally perceived
as alien to non-Western traditional sciences, already incorporates a great
deal of this indigenous knowledge. Since modern science has its genealogy
in the histories of both the West and the Rest, we should no longer use it
to sharply sunder the intellectual history of the West from the Rest.
This raises an important question: What is the significance of contem-
porary, postmodern, tradition-inspired critiques of modern science if they
are really confronting a hybrid bred in part from traditional knowledge?
The postmodern traditionalists can hardly afford to reject outright every part
of modern science, since in so doing they would be rejecting elements of
their own tradition.10 Instead, these critiques are better interpreted, whatever
the intent may be of those who make them, as drawing attention to valuable
knowledge and insights within the traditional sciences currently ignored or
rejected by modern science. They suggest that by making modern scientists
open a new dialogue with traditional knowledge holders, we could fruitfully
promote the growth of science in the future as dialogue did in the past.11
There is also a broader cultural advantage in nurturing a deeper appre-
ciation of the dialogical roots of modern science. An understanding of the
way scientific knowledge advanced through the interaction of ideas drawn
from different cultures would subvert attempts to use history either to
promote the hegemony of one single culture or to make the existence of
diverse cultures an excuse for confrontation and conflict. Both these ori-
entations have been promoted recently by adopting a type of historical
inquiry, by no means new, that studies the past with a view to predicting
the future—or rather constructs a narrative of the past that could become
a self-fulfilling prophecy for the future.
One such hegemonic narrative is the work of the political theorist Francis
Fukuyama, who sees the termination of the ideological conflict between
socialism and liberal capitalism as heralding “the end of history.” He argues
that cultures that adopt modern science, with the technology and economic
system associated with it, will inevitably dominate the future course of history.
In turn, they will force the rest of the world to follow the same path. For
Fukuyama, modern science is the logic of modernity and the directing force
of history. Criticizing those who deny progressiveness in history, he writes:
We have selected modern natural science as a possible underlying “mech-
anism” of directional historical change, because it is the only large scale
social activity that is by consensus cumulative and therefore directional.
(Fukuyama 1992, p. 80)
Thus, Fukuyama is a modernist with a vision of global civilization as ulti-
mately driven by the inexorable force of modern science—an enterprise
INTRODUCTION 3
invented only once in Europe but impossible to resist elsewhere. He reco-
gnizes no possibility for multicultural reservoirs of knowledge to advance
future science—the end of history is the end of traditional science. 12
In contrast to Fukuyama’s vision of the coming convergence of cultures,
the political theorist Samuel Huntington presents a future of cultures in
collision. Huntington sees the end of the Cold War as leading away from
a bipolar world, in which the conflict between liberal capitalism and
socialism dominated the world stage, to a multipolar world in which “the
clash of civilizations” becomes paramount. According to him the clash is
rooted in the radically different values that motivate civilizations—in par-
ticular their religion-inspired political, social, and moral orientations
(Huntington 1996). 13
Even though Fukuyama and Huntington do not address the concerns
of the science wars directly, what they say about civilizational interactions
can also be read as applying to the interaction of civilizational sciences.
This links their concerns directly to those that motivate the science wars.
Fukuyama’s view that science drives the directionality of history, and that
history will end with the triumph of liberal capitalism, parallels the com-
monly held opinion that modern science lies at the end of history and will
displace all previous traditions of natural knowledge. It is hardly likely that
Fukuyama would disagree with this; his view of science does not even
entertain the notion of alternative cognitive traditions. If it did, his claim
that we have come to the “end of history” by producing the way of life
inevitably linked to modern science would be weaker. A new cycle of his-
tory would begin if current science gave way to another tradition of knowl-
edge and a different way of life.
Huntington’s clash of civilizations can also be seen, by extension, as a
clash of civilizational sciences. According to the social scientist Ziauddin
Sardar, the clash between civilizational traditions of science is the deepest
dimension of the science wars, but is often ignored by those who see it only
as a clash of Western traditions—either Romantic versus Enlightenment,
or postmodern versus modern. For Sardar, the civilizational sciences
conflict began with the dawn of modern science but has hardly been
acknowledged explicitly—he terms it “the invisible science wars” (Sardar
2001, p. 120). Nevertheless, Sardar seems to suggest that this clandestine
war is now becoming more visible as critics of modern science—environ-
mentalists, feminists, multiculturalists—increasingly turn to non-Western
reservoirs of traditional knowledge to overcome the limitations they
perceive modern science to have.
The patterns for civilizational interaction provided by Huntington and
Fukuyama do not allow for a mutually fruitful dialogue between different
civilizations—and they suggest that this is also true of science. However, if
4 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
it can be shown that modern Western science profited from its dialogue
with non-Western traditions of science, then it would be possible to sug-
gest that the relations between civilizations need not always be adversarial
and confrontational. Civilizations could teach and learn from one another
in ways that are mutually beneficial.
Thus, the answer we give to what has been called Needham’s Grand
Question, “Why did modern science develop in Europe and not else-
where?”14
—because of a dialogue with other civilizational ideas or because
Europe managed to shield itself from the religious, social, cultural, and geo-
graphical factors that kept other civilizations chained to superstition, myth,
and error—will crucially influence our perception of intercivilizational
relations.15 Moreover, the question itself can be divided into two parts:
“Why did modern science develop in Europe?” and “Why did modern
science fail to develop in civilization X?” where civilization X can stand for
Chinese civilization, Arabic civilization, Indian civilization, and so on.
Answering both parts of the question has often provided an opportunity for
Eurocentric historians to find praiseworthy qualities within European lan-
guages, religions, and geography, or within European political, economic,
and social institutions that facilitated the birth and growth of modern sci-
ence, and blameworthy qualities within their non-European counterparts
that obstructed it. A dialogical history of modern science would require us
to reject such one-sided explanations and suggest that praise and blame need
to be assigned more evenhandedly. Traditional cultures deserve praise for
making discoveries that contributed to modern science, even if they are
assumed to deserve blame for failing to reach modern science. Western cul-
ture deserves blame for ignoring not only discoveries in traditional cultures
that became a part of science, but also traditional discoveries that continue
to be ignored by modern science, even if it deserves praise for creating mod-
ern science. Let us look now look at some attempts to answer the question,
Why did modern science not develop in civilization X?, without addressing
directly for the moment the question of why modern science did develop in
Europe.

The question, Why did modern science not develop in civilization X? is gen-
erally entertained seriously only with regard to civilizations like the Arabic,
Chinese, and Indian, which in other respects—religion, the arts, and litera-
ture and, to an extent, philosophy—are considered to have progressed and
achieved as much as the West.1 It does not occur to anyone to ask, say, Why
did Christianity not develop in China, or Renaissance representational art
in India? In religion and the arts we do not expect culture-neutral construc-
tions. But since the same science is taught everywhere, and scientific knowl-
edge is perceived as universal and cosmopolitan, it seems to make sense to
ask why it failed to develop in a particular civilization. Behind the question,
therefore, lies the assumption that modern science is the only science possi-
ble and could only have developed in the way it did. Thus it seems reason-
able to inquire why it failed to develop in civilizations outside Europe that,
in most other respects, were at least as advanced as Europe at the time of its
birth. Behind the question often lies the unspoken presumption that mod-
ern science did not develop through a dialogue with non-Western traditions
of science. Were it acknowledged that such dialogue contributed to both the
birth and growth of modern science, and that contemporary science grew by
standing on the shoulders of earlier non-European traditions, the question
would seem pointless. For example, the question of why modern science
did not develop in ancient Greece is rarely asked since it is already seen as
building on the accomplishments of Greek science.2
Moreover, the question would not be asked if modern science were treated
as only one local tradition of knowledge among others, without imputing to
it any cosmopolitan or universal status. Then there would seem little motive
A. Bala, The Dialogue of Civilizations in the Birth of Modern Science
© Arun Bala 2006
to ask why Western science did not develop in China as to ask why Western
art did not. It is only because modern science is considered universal that it
appears pressing to inquire why it developed in the West and not elsewhere.
Linked to the notion that modern science is universal is the assumption
that it has finally displaced all other traditions of science. Future scientists
have no choice but to work with, and within, this tradition of science.
Such a conclusion is often associated with the Eurocentric historical as-
sumption that modern science had no contributions from non-Western
cultures, so that future scientists have no choice but to become
Westernized in order to practice science. We might assume that such
claims are no longer explicitly advanced by scientists; that they have be-
come receptive to the possibility that non-Western cultures may contain
ideas that could potentially subvert modern science even if they have not
done so yet. Unfortunately, such comforting complacency would be mis-
placed. In their influential study Higher Superstition: The Academic Left and
Its Quarrels with Science, Gross and Levitt fall prey to Eurocentric preju-
dices in their otherwise cogent criticism of the extreme relativist views too
often taken by postmodern multiculturalists. They write:
Science, as the term is now understood is, moreover, uniquely associated
with Western culture. It arose only once, an invention that is unlikely to be
repeated in detail no matter how many other cultures and peoples even-
tually come to produce fine scientists. In a hundred years, the greatest
theoretical physicist in the world may well be Maori or Xhosa by descent;
he—or she, as may well be the case—will nonetheless be a Westerner in the
most important aspect of his or her intellectual temperament. The argu-
ment may be made pace Steiner, that even Mozart is outdone by the
polyrhythmic splendors of the Javanese gamelan or by the sonorities of
Indian classical music. No such possibility exists for the multiculturist chal-
lenging the intellectual hegemony of Western science, aside from pure
falsification. (Gross and Levitt 1994, pp. 219–220) 3
Once we assume that there can be only one possible tradition of sci-
ence, that this science was discovered in Europe, and that any other cul-
ture X should have been able to discover it given proper conditions—the
conditions that obtained within Europe at the time it developed there—it
seems reasonable to go on to inquire why science did not develop in a par-
ticular civilization X. The answer to this question has typically followed
one of two routes: either an explanation in terms of a cultural lack in X or
one of a cultural obstacle within X. Explanations in terms of cultural lack
appeal to a series of absences in X—the lack of the Christian religion, the
Greek heritage of philosophy, the Roman concept of law, a plural polity of
competing states (as in medieval Europe), an incipient capitalist merchant
8 T HE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
class, and so on. The absence in other cultures of factors present in Europe
is made to account for the failure of science to arise in these cultures. 4
Explanations that appeal to the absence of facilitating factors within civ-
ilization X are often complemented by appeal to the presence of intrinsic
inhibiting factors—social, cultural, and institutional—that hindered the
emergence of science. Religious dogmatism, overly pragmatic philosophies
lacking theoretical interests, despotic rulers, and centralized kingdoms that
hindered plural discourse are all invoked to explain the failure of modern
science to emerge in culture X, despite the fact that similar factors arguably
prevailed within Europe at the dawn of the Scientific Revolution.5 The
effect of such studies is to interpret culture X solely in terms of absences
and presences within it that failed to provide the environment to nourish
scientific ideas even had they happened to emerge in incipient form.
To see how the systematic use of such an approach can distort our un-
derstanding of both traditional sciences and their contribution to modern
science, let us examine closely one major study of multicultural traditions of
science—The Cambridge Illustrated History of the World’s Science by historian
Colin Ronan.6 With his specialized expertise in Chinese science, as well as
his interest in the Arabic, Indian, Egyptian, and Mesopotamian civilizations,
Ronan is more sympathetic than most to premodern traditions of science.
He is also one of the few historians in modern times to have looked at tra-
ditions of science across many different cultures from one comprehensive
point of view. To find a parallel we have to go back to al-Andalusi’s Book of
the Categories of Nations, in eleventh century Spain, which compared
Egyptian, Greek, Arabic, Indian, Chinese, and other scientific traditions be-
fore the birth of modern science. A more recent study edited by Helaine
Selin, the Encyclopedia of the History of Science, Technology and Medicine in
Non-Western Cultures, is a collection of articles by many authors, and as such
it does not provide a unified perspective across civilizations. Ronan’s study is
thus a unique contemporary attempt to look at the global traditions of
science and evaluate their contributions. Yet, despite his rich and erudite
accounts of non-Western traditions of science, Ronan continues to be obses-
sed with the presumed cultural deficiencies and obstacles that he thinks
precluded the emergence of modern science in these civilizations.
Consider Ronan’s historical account of Chinese science. At the end of
his long discussion of the role of the state bureaucracy in science, Ronan
proceeds to answer the question, Why did modern science not develop in
China? as follows:
[D]espite the fact that in so many fields Chinese science reached at a very
early date a level of knowledge equal or superior to that of Europe in 1500,
there was no “scientific revolution” in China: the breakthrough into the era
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 9
of powerful modern science occurred in Europe not in the East. Why
should this have been? It is plainly impossible to give a categorical answer to
such a question, but it may in part be connected with this same close asso-
ciation of science and the State bureaucracy. In China, the urgent impulse
to exploration, to new discovery for its own sake never developed as it did
in Renaissance Europe, and there was no aspiration to break the mould of
existing orthodoxies as inspired men such as Galileo. And one of the reasons
for that must lie with the prevalence of the efficient but traditional bureau-
cracy of China, its rules and outlook defined by Confucius many centuries
before. (Ronan 1983, p.186)
Ronan points to a variety of internal causes to explain the failure of the
Chinese to create modern science—the obstacles set by the state bureau-
cracy, the peculiar lack of curiosity in Chinese culture, the incapacity of
the Chinese to value knowledge for its own sake, the conservative nature
of Chinese traditions, and the obstacles placed by Confucian thought.
Thus Ronan’s list includes Chinese politics, psychology, society, tradition,
and philosophy as impediments in the way of science. This can even be in-
terpreted as a sweeping indictment of Chinese civilization as a whole dur-
ing its period of greatest development—from the Han dynasty beginning
in 206 BCE, which made Confucianism the state ideology, to the year
1500—precisely the time during which Chinese advances in science and
technology continually outstripped those of Europe. Even during the Han
era, which lasted until 220 CE, the Chinese made major strides in science
and technology: the compass, paper, and the seismograph were all invented
in this period. By 1500 the Chinese had added the mechanical clock,
printing, and gunpowder to the list, to name only a few seminal discover-
ies. Surely these achievements cannot be the outcome of a culture pro-
foundly antithetical to scientific achievement in the psychological, social,
political, and cultural spheres.
Let us look more closely at Ronan’s charge that the bureaucracy inhib-
ited Chinese science. This fails to explain why modern science emerged in
Europe precisely in those areas that developed an efficient state bureaucracy
comparable in many respects to that of China—including Britain, France,
and Holland during the age of the Enlightenment, when modern science
was in its formative phase. Equally unconvincing is his claim that the
Chinese never developed the impulse to pursue exploration and discovery
for their own sake when Confucius himself, as well as neo-Confucian
thinkers, repeatedly emphasized the importance of cultivating knowledge
through the investigation of things. It is precisely this emphasis on the
investigation of things that explains the vast strides made by Chinese science
from the Han to the early modern era under Confucian bureaucracy. But
Ronan’s account requires us to believe that Chinese civilization eminently
10 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
advanced scientific knowledge over 1,700 years in spite of an indifference to
knowledge for its own sake and a Confucian aversion to innovation. Ronan’s
claim appears even more dubious when we consider that the Chinese not
only developed a catalogue to record the progress of their inventions but also
erected statues to commemorate those who made these discoveries.
Even though Ronan deprecates the capacity of Chinese culture to sus-
tain science, he is nevertheless a largely sympathetic exponent of the his-
tory of Chinese scientific achievements. Much more censorious is the
sinologist Derek Bodde. Bodde argues that Chinese science was no more
than a pseudoscience, which remarkably did not obstruct technological
progress despite its metaphysical, methodological, and theoretical short-
comings. Bodde blames the failure of the Chinese to develop modern sci-
ence on a large catalogue of factors—the form of written Chinese, the nature
of Chinese religion, the role of government and society, the structure of
Chinese morals and values, and the way human–nature relations were
defined in China. Although he writes that his mission is “to determine, as
best as we can, what may have been the factors in Chinese civilization that
either favored or hindered scientific and technological progress,” his con-
clusions focus on obstacles rather than facilitating factors because he does
not believe there was anything like a Chinese science (Bodde 1991, p. 4). 7
It would be unfair to charge Ronan and Bodde with constructing dis-
courses that Edward Said characterized as projecting “orientalist structures
of attitude and reference” deliberately connived to define and subjugate,
control and marginalize, non-European cultures and people (Said 1994). 8
They are too sympathetic to the wider Chinese cultural tradition to be
suspected of such nefarious designs. Nevertheless, their drive to identify
deficiencies and obstacles in a cultural tradition that both hold in high
regard—precisely at the moment they attempt to account for the Chinese
failure to develop modern science—demands explanation. The answer lies
in their presupposition that modern science constitutes the only possible
universal and cosmopolitan tradition of science. Although the Chinese
were in a position to discover this tradition, given their technological
advantage over Europe for millennia, they did not. It therefore seems rea-
sonable to infer that powerful cultural factors within China must have
obstructed an otherwise natural development. If we assume that the dis-
covery of modern science is a desirable achievement—something most of
us might not be prepared to deny—these factors can easily be interpreted
as shortcomings of Chinese civilization.9
Yet, had Ronan and Bodde, following Needham, seen Chinese science
as making indispensable contributions to the development of modern sci-
ence, and even serving as a necessary step toward it, they would not have
viewed Chinese culture so negatively. Needham took Chinese science to be
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 11
a protoscience that made important contributions to modern science.
His dialogical orientation led him to examine positive factors, such as the
Taoist organic materialist orientation to nature, which motivated Chinese
discoveries in science and technology. Moreover, observing that Chinese
organic materialist metaphysics is more concordant with the discoveries
of quantum physics than seventeenth-century mechanical philosophy,
Needham also thought it possible that future science might come closer to
the Chinese view of nature. This suggests that Needham does not take the
classical tradition of science to be the final word in science. Consequently,
he is not led, like Ronan and Bodde, to develop disparaging explanations
for the failure of the Chinese to develop universal science. 10
Let us now examine Ronan’s assessment of the Indian tradition of
science and his judgment on why Indian civilization never developed
modern science. He writes:
In the period before the Scientific Revolution, Hindu science made a num-
ber of original contributions that were to be importantly developed in
China, in Islam or in Europe. Nevertheless, perhaps because of the pre-
vailing religious tone of the Indian civilization, it never developed into a
full-fledged science, and over the past 200 years science in the Indian sub-
continent has had a primarily Western flavor. (Ronan 1983, p. 196)
Unlike China, where the Confucian bureaucracy is faulted for the failure
to achieve modern science, the blame here is attributed to Indian religious
culture. In the process Ronan ignores many ideas derived from India that
he himself avows, in his historical account of Indian science, as having been
of seminal significance to the growth of modern science—the decimal
place system with zero for numbers, trigonometric theory and methods,
algebraic discoveries, surgical medical techniques, and a highly developed
linguistic theory. Moreover, he also argues that the Indian atomic theories
were far more sophisticated, complex, and subtle than any developed in
the West until modern times. Surely it would also be reasonable to
ask what positive role, if any, Indian religions could have played in these
various scientific achievements rather than taking them as obstacles to
the development of modern science. After all, these major achievements
were made under conditions in which the Indian religions, and the
philosophies associated with them, constituted dominant elements of the
culture; and the decline of Indian science largely occurred in the modern
period when India came under colonial rule.11 The failure to raise the
question of the positive influence of Indian religions on science, and the
emphasis on religion as the cause of decline of Indian science, itself sug-
gests a lack of balance in Ronan’s cultural appraisal—an imbalance that
12 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
appears to project the modern warfare between science and religion onto
classical India.
Surprising as it might appear, and in spite of his own documentation of
the important contributions made by Arabic science to medieval European
science, Ronan ends his discussion of this tradition by proposing another
negative diagnosis:
Yet although the early Arabs and the whole Islamic world studied science
and made notable contributions, their achievements came to an end; they
never extended to modern science. Islam extols the value of revelation above
all else: it is the supreme authority ... There then developed the attitude of
passive acceptance. This attitude was inevitably inimical to independent
scientific thinking, as intellectual traditionalism won the day. Islam never
separated religion and science into watertight compartments as we do now,
and the torch of science had to be carried on by others. (Ronan 1983, p. 240)
There is no doubt that Arabic science did decline after a period of brilliant
achievements. Many Arabic scholars and historians had assumed until
quite recently that the glorious era of Arabic science lasted about five cen-
turies—from about 750 CE to 1258 CE—until the Mongols destroyed
Baghdad and put an end to the Abbasid Caliphate.12 However, there have
been some attempts to revise such histories—it is now known that many
seminal discoveries in mathematical astronomy were made in Iran in the
thirteenth century by the Maragha School associated with the names of
al-Tusi and al-Urdi, and that this astronomy reached its culmination in the
work of al-Shatir in Damascus in the fourteenth century. Nevertheless, it
is important to note, even if we ignore these later developments, that we
are here concerned with a long period of scientific development—indeed
a period longer than that which separates us from the publication of
Copernicus’ seminal De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium in 1543. Over
this extended epoch it was the religion of Islam that provided the umbrella
under which the sciences and philosophy developed. It inspired Arabic
scholars to be receptive to scientific traditions from all the different cul-
tures with which they came in contact—the Greek, the Indian, the Persian,
and the Chinese. 13 During this period, Islam functioned as a facilitating
rather than an inhibitory factor on scientific progress. Hence, to see the
religious inspiration that promoted and nourished Arabic science purely
as an inhibitory factor is surely to take an excessively one-sided view of
the influence of Islam on science. There is, however, no denying that the
mystical turn in Islam that began to dominate Arabic culture after the
collapse of the Abbasids did view scientific and philosophical thought with
suspicion, but this cannot lead us to ignore the positive influence of
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 13
religion over a period longer than the historical era of modern science.
Moreover, as we will find later, these new theological interpretations that
undermined the Arabic tradition of science nevertheless paved the way for
the rise of modern science in Europe (largely by undermining the meta-
physical foundations of Greek and Arabic rationalist approaches to natural
philosophy).
In his account Ronan seems to be adopting what can be described as an
inverse-Merton thesis. 14 The sociologist Robert Merton had argued in the
1930s that Puritan religious values had played a positive role in the devel-
opment of early modern science. Although his thesis was originally con-
fined to the context of Britain, it soon became extended more widely by
his followers to account for the rise of science in Europe. In contrast to
these neo-Mertonian attempts to explain the rise of science in Europe by
invoking the presence of a certain complex of cultural and religious values,
Ronan appears concerned with explaining the failure of science to emerge
in other cultures by appeal to their distinctive cultural and religious values.
In particular he invokes the negative impact that Confucian, Hindu, and
Islamic values played in inhibiting the emergence of modern science in
cultures otherwise as advanced, or more advanced, than Europe. The
Mertonian positive valuation of the Puritan religious orientation is now
transformed into a thesis regarding the inhibitory role of Confucian,
Hindu, and Islamic ideals on scientific growth. Both approaches are linked
by their common appeal to ethical or religious values, with one difference:
Merton appeals to such values to explain why modern science emerged
and grew in certain places in Europe, whereas Ronan appeals to them to
explain why modern science did not emerge in other places. 15
A distinctive one-sidedness moves Ronan’s overall approach. Although
he acknowledges that there was scientific development in China, India,
and the Arabic worlds when they were dominated by Confucian, Hindu,
and Islamic ideals—indeed this is what his historical account of the sci-
ences in these cultural areas describes—he nevertheless fails to consider the
positive role these ideals may have played in the scientific achievements
made there. Instead he concentrates on how these religious cultures
obstructed the emergence of modern science. Thus, instead of looking at
the way religious values promoted the emergence of the different structures
of science in the Indian, Chinese, and Arabic cultural arenas—scientific
traditions that he himself acknowledges made important contributions to
modern science—he appears more concerned with how they inhibited
modern science from developing there. Such an orientation can only be
natural to someone who assumes that modern science is the only kind of
universal science possible and that it would have developed in any culture
provided there were no specific inhibitory factors precluding it. 16
14 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
Moreover, if Ronan had taken more seriously their contributions to
modern science rather than their failure to reach it, he might have been led
to a more positive valuation of their norms and institutions that made such
contributions possible. This becomes evident when we consider his treat-
ment of Greek cultural values and institutions. In this instance he is led to
pay glowing tribute to the Greeks, despite their failure to create modern
science, because of the seminal contributions they made to it. His focus
here is not on why the Greeks failed to create modern science but on why
they were able to make important contributions to it. If not for the differ-
ent approach he takes, and the ensuing evaluation he makes of the role
Greek science played in modern science—an emphasis on their success in
contributing to it—he would have been led, given his general approach to
the other traditions of science, into another attempt to explain the failure
of modern science to emerge in the Greek world. This might even have
ended with a listing of Hellenistic cultural impediments and deficits that
led to this failure. However, given his positive valuation of the Greek role
in modern science, this is not the route Ronan takes. Instead, he writes:
With Ptolemy we come to the last of the great figures of Hellenistic science,
and the end of an astonishing intellectual development that was Greek in
origin. It started, as we have seen, with the philosophers who wished to make
sense of the physical world in which they found themselves. They would not
of course have called themselves scientists—the word is a nineteenth-century
one—though they might have accepted the seventeenth-century name natu-
ral philosopher, yet it was science that they practiced; not the mathematically
oriented experimental science that we have today but science nevertheless,
an attempt to rationalize the world of natural experience without recourse
to divine intervention. This we have traced from Thales to its high devel-
opment in Athens at the Lyceum and at the library and the museum in
Alexandria. It marks the first great concerted effort of Western man to un-
derstand the workings of Nature ... Today we can look back and see in it
the foundations of the scientific ideal—the pursuit of science untrammeled
by political or religious restriction—and the basis of our present scientific
culture. (Ronan 1983, pp. 123–124)
Ronan’s account of Greek science merits closer examination. First,
although he admits that Greek science is not the mathematical empirical
science we have today, he is nevertheless prepared to concede to the Greeks
the achievement of having developed the foundations of modern science.
Apparently, when it comes to the Greeks, science need not necessarily be
reduced to modern science. The reason for this assessment seems to be that
the Greeks pursued knowledge without confronting any political or religious
restrictions and provided the basis for the later emergence of modern science.
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 15
However, Ronan still leaves unexplained the failure of the Greeks to
achieve modern science. There is scope here for a negative diagnosis of
Greek culture that he conspicuously fails to take up. Instead he stresses
the values and institutions that lead to the successful growth of Greek
science—precisely the sort of explanation that he does not offer to account
for the growth of Chinese, Arabic, or Indian sciences in their own phases
of progressive development. The fact that Greek science, although differ-
ent from modern science, contributed significantly to modern science is
seen as grounds for a positive judgment of Greek cultural values—but the
same courtesy is not extended to other traditions, although he acknowl-
edges that they did contribute to modern science.
Second, although Ronan acknowledges that the Greeks were more
philosophers than scientists, he is prepared to call them scientists because
their effort constituted “an attempt to rationalize the world of natural
experience without recourse to divine intervention” (Ronan 1983, p. 123).
If this is a reason for calling Greek natural philosophers scientists, then
surely he should accord thinkers within Chinese civilization—especially
Confucian thinkers—the same status. They, like the Greeks, developed an
organic conception of the cosmos; like Plato and Aristotle, they also ex-
plained phenomena in terms of five elements—earth, water, fire, wood,
metal—in contrast to the Greek elements of earth, water, fire, air, and
quintessence; like the Greeks, their medical traditions combined a five-
element theory with the qualities hot, cold, wet, and dry.
Moreover, the Chinese even went further in the direction of nonteleo-
logical explanations, because unlike Plato, who believed the heavenly bod-
ies to be Gods, or Aristotle, who perceived them as moved by intelligences,
the Chinese saw them in completely naturalistic terms. Nor did they sep-
arate heavenly and terrestrial phenomena by treating them as being obe-
dient to different laws in the way the Greeks did; or take them to be made
of a different sort of substance. 17 The same elements combined in the
heavens as on earth. 18 This contrasts sharply with the Greek view that phe-
nomena on earth were to be explained by the four elements earth, air, fire,
and water, but those in the heavens were to be explained by the peculiar
properties of the celestial element quintessence. 19 Surely if we are to use the
criterion of “rationalizing the world of natural experience without recourse
to divine intervention,” then the Chinese have a greater claim to being
scientific than the Greeks. By contrast Plato, with his heaven filled
with Gods, and Aristotle, with his notion of divine intelligences guiding
heavenly motions, appear only as quasi-scientific thinkers. 20
Why then does Ronan see Confucianism as an inhibiting factor that
prevented the Chinese from developing modern science but nevertheless
fail to perceive the quasi-animist views of Plato and Aristotle similarly?
16 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
The answer seems to be indicated in the very passage quoted earlier—
Greek science contributed to the birth of modern science. Hence the
Greeks, in spite of having an order of science different from that of mod-
ern science, did possess those positive cultural values that promoted the
birth of modern science. By contrast the Chinese—whose science is well
known to Ronan since he specialized in the study of it—did not contribute
to modern science in the same deep sense. It behooves us therefore, so
Ronan seems to think, to examine the cultural factors that precluded the
development of modern science in China. Such an account fails to value
Chinese science positively because of its failure to make crucial contribu-
tions to modern science, but it values Greek science precisely because it
did. It is this ultimately Eurocentric bias in evaluating their contributions
that leads Ronan to see Greek cultural values as positive and Confucian
ones as negative with regard to science.
Moreover, Ronan’s Eurocentric bias leads him not only to praise the
Greeks for their contributions to modern science, and disparage trans-
Western cultural values for obstructing the emergence of modern science,
but also to dispute the claims by many ancient Greeks of their indebted-
ness to scientific discoveries rooted in Mesopotamia and Egypt—especially
the latter. He counters the prevalent Greek view that their mathematics
began in Egypt:
The Greeks claim to have received their mathematics from Egypt by way of
Thales; Herodotus, Aristotle and his pupil Eudemos, who wrote a history of
mathematics, all claim that Thales “after a visit to Egypt, brought this study
to Greece.” Indeed, Eudemos goes so far as to specify what Thales brought,
namely a number of propositions in theoretical geometry. Yet our present
knowledge of Egyptian mathematics gives us no grounds for supposing that
the Egyptians actually possessed any geometrical theory; theirs was a practi-
cal rule-of-thumb geometry. But if Thales did not bring such geometry from
Egypt did he, perhaps, devise it himself? Certainly geometry was that
branch of mathematics at which the Greeks were to excel: their art shows
the love of symmetry and elegant shapes but, though they were later to dis-
play geometrical genius, there is no firm evidence that Thales began the
process. Certainly he did some geometry, but it would all seem to have been
of a practical kind—and that was just the kind of thing he could have
brought from Egypt. Yet, of course, it was from such practical geometry
that the whole theoretical structure was later to be developed. (Ronan 1983,
p. 68)
Ronan’s interpretation is extremely curious. He dismisses the Greek
accounts of their debt to Egypt and yet gives no grounds for rejecting the
authority of Herodotus and Aristotle except to say that their views cannot
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 17
be substantiated on independent grounds. One is led to wonder what
other grounds are needed. These thinkers are closer to the events being
described than Ronan, who has no hesitation in claiming that the
Egyptians could not have made the contributions they were said to have
made. Instead Ronan offers the weak argument that the Greek talent for
geometry came from their love of symmetry and elegant shapes in their art.
On such grounds the Egyptians should display similar talent—their art
and their monumental pyramid architectures display an equal love of sym-
metry and elegance. His whole exercise of arbitrary dismissal without pre-
senting any counterevidence to claims by dependable Greek writers seems
solely designed to support his opinion that theoretical discourse in geom-
etry first emerged with the Greeks, thereby preserving his Eurocentric con-
ception of the history of modern science.
There is a more charitable way of interpreting Ronan’s claim. He could
be saying that Thales did not bring geometry from the Egyptians in the
sense of a geometrical theory with associated theorems and proofs, but
only what Eudemos calls a number of “propositions in theoretical geome-
try”—parts of mere “practical rule-of-thumb geometry.” Why should this
be grounds for saying that the Egyptians did not possess geometry or
mathematics? They can easily be seen as the first seeds of theoretical geom-
etry that became much more systematized by the Greeks. One cannot deny
that the Greek achievement of casting geometry as a deductive system pro-
vided a richer and more rigorous theoretical framework for the discipline,
but could this discipline even have taken off without building on the cre-
ative discoveries of the Egyptians that Ronan dismisses as mere practical
rules of thumb? Indeed one could even argue that discovering an interest-
ing theorem in geometry is far more difficult than proving it—the former
involves a visionary experience that cannot be predicted in advance; the
latter, a much more directed activity whose end goal is already predeter-
mined. Even in the modern era the mathematician Ramanujan provides a
classic example of one who made numerous discoveries in number theory
that many lesser mathematicians spent decades proving. If Ramanujan’s
achievement can be deemed mathematical, there is no reason not to extend
the same courtesy to the ancient Egyptian thinkers who came up with the
theorems of geometry that Thales carried to Greece.
The logic of his position—namely that only Greece achieved theoreti-
cal knowledge in mathematics and science even when it learned something
from others—also leads Ronan to write off the significant contributions
that Mesopotamian civilization made to the development of scientific
thought. Thus, after writing admiringly “that the Sumerians and Babylonians
made great advances in mathematics may be an understatement; they seem
to have laid the very foundations of the entire subject” (Ronan 1983, p. 41),
18 THE DIALOGUE OF CIVILIZATIONS
he forgets his high praise when he finally comes to evaluate their achieve-
ments:
Yet for the most part the activities of these ancient astronomers and mathe-
maticians eventually proved to be misdirected. Their work in observing and
calculating the movements of the heavens was often astonishing, but much
of it proved of little importance to the ultimate development of science. It
was their failure to inquire more carefully into the nature of the heavenly
bodies, and into the nature of the mechanisms that drove them across the
sky, that led to this dead end. Nevertheless, the subtlety of their work is a fine
tribute to the inspiration of animistic religion, and of the belief in the kind
of magic that ascribes more importance to the relationships between phe-
nomena than to the nature of the objects themselves. (Ronan 1983, p. 61)
Ronan’s account of the history of science appears seriously muddled on
this point. How can the achievements of the Sumerians and Babylonians,
who, in his own words, “laid the very foundations” of mathematics, turn
out, in his own words, to be of “little importance to the ultimate develop-
ment of science”? There is a profound gap between the high praise given
earlier in the text and the disparaging conclusion that follows. This conclu-
sion appears solely designed to erect walls between the Greek and earlier
traditions of science so as to preserve the Eurocentric history of modern
science that informs his whole, otherwise rich, study. To admit that
Sumerians and Babylonians could have laid the basis for mathematics is
to open the door to a dialogical conception of science subversive of his
Eurocentric paradigm of its history.21
Ronan’s history of Chinese, Arabic, Indian, Egyptian, Mesopotamian,
and other traditions of science concentrates too much on faithfully record-
ing their achievements while at the same time marginalizing any signi-
ficant appreciation of their impact on modern science. Non-European
traditions of systematized knowledge of nature are acknowledged; but their
influence, even when noted, is minimized. Ronan seems bent on showing
that modern science developed in Europe because cultural obstacles pre-
cluded it from developing elsewhere; and that though it received con-
tributions from many cultures, only Greek culture carried those positive
cultural values that made modern science possible.
Consider Needham’s Grand Question “Why did science develop in
Europe and not elsewhere?” in the light of Ronan’s approach to the history
of science across civilizations. His Eurocentric response to this question
recognizes the role of dialogue with Greek science that led to the birth and
growth of modern science, but marginalizes the influence of other cultures
as not crucial, even when he acknowledges them. It leads him to look for
positive values in Europe that contributed to the rise of modern science
WHY DID MODERN SCIENCE NOT DEVELOP IN CIVILIZATION X? 19
and negative values in other cultures that obstructed it. Such Mertonian
and inverse-Mertonian explanations of the rise of modern science, and its
failure to emerge, can only be subverted by demonstrating the indispensa-
ble role played by ideas from many cultures in the birth of modern
science—especially in the success of the Copernican Revolution, which
can be deemed to be the key event that led to modern science. This is pre-
cisely what we shall set out to accomplish in the present study. However,
before we undertake this task, it is illuminating to examine more closely
the historical and epistemological presumptions that have informed many
otherwise different Eurocentric histories of modern science.
